Hello?
Janavarta News Paper! (People's Herald)
Yes.
Am I talking to the Editor?
Haridas, Ashok Gupta here!
Yes Sir?
I'm calling you with some news
What news?
There've been some
Jaundice cases here in Chandipur!
Jaundice?
Yes, what we call Infective Hepatitis!
Also other water
borne diseases as well...
...like typhoid,
gastroenteritis and others!
They've occurred in our
hospital and in private ones!
None of them have ever
been seen in Chandipur!
Please print this so that
people can be made aware
Know how it is happening?
No, not yet !
We can't find the source
of the contamination !
Should I tell you what I think
- Yes, do!
The Santoshpur chemical
factory across the river...
...could be leaving chemical
impurities in the water...
...because we know the fish are dying!
We've printed that too!
Haven't you read it?
No, chemical impurities
don't cause such diseases
I'm sure you know better!
Will you print it?
Should we say Infective
Hepatitis or Jaundice?
Jaundice is better understood!
All right, I'm sending you a reporter
- Sanat Dasgupta
Please give him more details
All right
- I'll keep you informed
Thank you, sir.
National Film Development Corporation,
India presents
An adaptation of Henrik Ibsen's play
"An Enemy of the People"
Satyajit Ray's
GANASHATRU
Soumitra Chatterjee,
Dhritiman Chatterjee, Deepankar De...
Ruma Guhathakurta, Mamta Shankar
Camera : Barun Raha
Associate Director : Ashok Bose
Editor : Dulal Dutta
Produced by: National Film
Development corpn, India
Screenplay, Music and
Direction : Satyajit Ray
Home made , I presume?
Yes. Like it?
- Delicious!
In the office I just have tea.
I'm having this out of greed!
I was wondering how
you found time to come
I thought newspaper
editors worked till midnight!
True,
...but as I said I had to
meet the doctor urgently on work
He's normally here by now...
There seems to be an
epidemic about, though
What epidemic?
Jaundice!
- Again?
So it seems
We'd written about a
few cases in Janavarta.
The doctor himself told us about them!
It's never happened here before!
He's been worried the past few days
There've been quite a few cases...
...in his private practice as well!
I hope it'll end!
After Bhargava's temple has come up...
...these last 10 years
have been so different!
It's still 2 months to Shivratri...
...yet all hotels are booked fully!
Chandipur is an important place now!
We love this place!
We've been born and brought up here!
Chandan!
Of course he studied
medicine in Calcutta
After our marriage,
we stayed there a
while as he was practicing
I didn't like it
I felt at peace again when
he returned to Chandipur!
We prefer small towns
Compared to Calcutta's pollu...
Where did the sun rise today?
Never find the time, too busy
The editor of Janavarta,
Haridas Bagchi...
and my brother-in-law
Of course,
...don't I know the
Chairman of the Municipality?
Hasn't he returned yet?
- Maybe with a patient!
Will you have tea?
- No, I've just had some
It's home made
- Not between meals!
Still having trouble
with your digestion ?
Ashok's prescription didn't work...
...so I've turned to herbal medicine.
Won't you have anything?
- Just a glass of water
Okay.
How's your paper doing?
Still running!
You seem to have moved a
bit to the left lately
Has it improved the circulation?
Do you read it?
At times, its the
only daily in Chandipur
That is why I do go over it sometimes.
Hadn't your paper first
reported about jaundice?
Thanks to the doctor!
Surprising!
He didn't say anything to me!
Maybe he didn't find the time.
You know how absent minded he is!
What does he think about it?
Not much...
...but he's quite worried!
Even if it's jaundice...
...it won't stop people
coming for the festival!
Even since the
Tripureshwar temples's been built...
...they've increase 3 fold!
I needn't tell you.
You're the President
of the Bhavgava Trust!
Have you ever been to the temple?
Indeed, both of us have been there
I'm not like Ashok,
I believe in religion
A week of praying at the
temple and my spondilitis was cured!
Really?
- They say Shiva is Very powerful
That must be my husband
I hope so. I've some work with him
I have to go soon!
What news of your son?
He decided to stay back
In America?
So it seems
Oh, Nishit? What brings you here?
Sit, I'll tell you
Saw Ronen coming on foot,
so I gave him a lift!
Have a seat, Ronen.
They've all been waiting for you
I got delayed by a patient
The same case of jaundice?
Yes, he's out of danger now.
What news of the hospital?
That's what I came to hear
There's nothing wrong there,
just an increase of
these jaundice cases!
Bhargava wanted to know...
...if you had
adequate stocks of medicine?
No worry there!
What worries me is the cause
of this water contamination!
Is it from any particular area?
I think so, but it
requires investigation
Some tea, Ronen?
I don't mind
Ranu isn't back yet
That's all right, I'll wait
By the way...
...any letters for me?
None!
Let me know if you need anything
That won't be necessary
Bhargava has done a great
service by building the hospital...
Chandipur has all the facilities now
I think among small towns... none can...
...compare with Chandipur
I agree with you.
Even culturally we
are not lagging behind!
Look at Ronen, he's from here!
See what he's achieved!
We're doing what we can
We've formed a Theater group.
The doctor's daughter also acts in it
Brought out, a year ago, a
literary quarterly journal...
Ronen works in a bank
He has a lucrative job
That's good
What's your journal called?
The Torch (Mashal)
Which way do you lean?
Right?
Or left?
Today most journals
lean a bit to the left
But we have just begun.
We have a lot to overcome
Few Subscribers
It's the effort that matters
You've said everything
but the important thing!
I leave that to you -What is it?
He's our future son-in-law! -Is that so?
Really? Congratulations.
Thanks.
When is the happy day?
This "May"!
Is Ranu still teaching at school?
Yes, but she needn't
any more from May...
...because Ronen has
been promoted from January!
Haridas, you've been sitting quiet!
How're you getting along? -I'm
looking forward to your story?
What about?
About Chandipur!
You'd written about its climate once
Now write something else!
This cultural scene...
it can be a good subject
No... leave it for now
Why not?
It would be a very
good thing for Chandipur
The news about jaundice
must have upset many people
I've been upset too!
Terribly upset
I'm in no mood to write!
But to refuse to write... aren't
you a well wisher of Chandipur?
Of course, a hundred fold!
No one feels than I do!
That's fine! We're
trying to build Chandipur...
...into a major tourist
spot ...in West Bengal
We need your active support!
As for these new viruses...
...the municipality is
behind you, rest assured!
Leaving? -Yes
I'll come some other time!
-Don't forget!
Ronen, send me a copy of your journal
I will - Goodnight.
Goodnight.
The Chairman appeared in an affable mood
His mood is off...
...when he has indigestion!
I thought he'd be upset at meeting me!
Heard what he asked about my journal?
Don't take that seriously
No, I was in a fix
didn't know what to say
Nishit has always been conservative
We never agree on anything
But we have some good points
efficiency is worth praising
Been Chairman of
Municipality 3 times running
The idea of the temple...
...is his Bhargava only
conceived of the hospital
But for so many
people visiting Chandipur
...he alone is responsible
It's now an obsession with him
He's a partner in
Bhargava's rice mill, is he?
Yes, rice mill. Cold storage.
He is pretty well off.
You're gossiping here...
While I work to death!
Why so late?
Meeting.
Some tea?
Yes, I will
Seeing your mood...
...may I ask you a
question without fear?
Don't be dramatic! What question?
Is your notebook in the bag?
Yes
But it's better you don't see it today
If you have any proofs, give them to me,
I'll correct them.
Thanks.
A letter for you, father
When did it come?
The postman brought it as
I was leaving for school
Excuse me while I read this
What news of your school?
It's only 5 months old -Like it?
I do!
Even more at the end of
the month when I get paid!
But I've no control over what I teach
I don't believe half of what I teach
But it's good in a way...
everyone loves me!
I am the youngest of the teachers.
Has the story I gave you
to translate been done?
I've had no time.
I hope you're not in a hurry for it?
Within the next week....
Who's letter? Father!
What is it?
I thought as much
I was right.
Nishit....
...if he were here, he'd have known!
I am quite restless to know.
Listen... this isn't just a letter...
I had sent a sample of
Chandipur's water...
...to Calcutta for analysis
Here it is report!
Water from where?
From the most crowded part of Chandipur!
Bhuvanpulli! -Bhuvanpulli!
This report says that the
water is full of bacteria!
Most patients came from there,
so I sent sample from there....
...now its proved that
whatever waterborne disease...
...are found in Chandipur's...
...the entire source is Bhuvanpulli!
That means?... -What?
Bhuvanpulli has our temple
Exactly.
At the centre of Bhuvanpulli !
Everyone is using that temple water
Not only that, they're drinking it!
Holy water!
That very infested water,
which faithful are drinking....
...from that very water,
poison is entering people!
The question is...
where daily a thousand
people drink the holy water...
...why is not everyone being affected?
Because there is a built
in resistance in the body.
We call it immunity!
This is what protects
everyone from getting ill!
But if even one is affected by typhoid,
cholera or jaundice...
...then that is dangerous!
How did such a scandal
take place? -Very simple...
The laying of underground
pipes must have been negligent!
The water pipe must have cracked.
The drain too cracked!
Now these waters are mixing
This is always happening in our country
What will you do?
I must send this report to
my brother, with my comments
As municipal Chairman, he
must take action immediately
And as long as the temple
water is not purified...
...till then it cannot be used!
I have found out that...
...there's no natural
source of water nearby!
Bhuvanpulli has a
small number of tube wells
So apart from complete
repair of the system,
...there's no way out!
Doctor Gupta.
Can we... print this... in the papers?
Must you ask?
Even about the temple?
You doubt it?
There'll be panic everywhere...
Yes. That is true.
Okay.
Don't mention Bhuvanpulli's name
Say a thickly
populated area of Chandipur.
Lets see what my brother says,
then it can be given the headlines!
This is just to give people a warning
This is an
extraordinary thing you've done!
You'll see, soon
you'll be a national hero!
No, Haridas...
I don't want to be hero!
I want to be an ordinary citizen
Whatever I've done...
...is my duty as a doctor!
Hail Lord. Come and
give the offering here.
I will perform the veneration here.
Priest. Please take my offerings.
Sir. Please repeat the chant after me.
Don't break the queue. Walk in a queue.
Where is the coconut seller?
Give me some holy water.
Hey, move ahead. Come on.
Hey, don't keep
standing here. Come on. Move.
It is taking a long
time for the veneration.
Father, I cannot find mother anywhere.
Priest. Please perform my veneration.
There are so many
waiting for their turn.
Hey, move ahead. Come on.
Hey, don't keep
standing here. Come on. Move.
Maya. - Coming.
Coffee.
Back so soon?
Nishit's coming!
He's got my report
Haridas had phoned
He needs something
Any more patients?
Sushanta is dead!
Dead?
Yes
At 6:30 am
But actually..
..he was very critical.
The first person known to us, gone!
More will go!
If nothing is done at once!
Surely Nishit will do something!
The problem is... he is jealous!
If he had discovered it himself then...
He is Adhir Mukherjee,
our printer and publisher
Then you will be
responsible in the eyes of the law...
...if anything
objectionable is published
True!
He wants a few words with you
Have some tea or coffee
Ho, we're only here a short while
Do sit!
You've seen the news?
-Yes, I think it will work
What is it? Tell me!
I didn't come to speak
about any objectionable news
I've come to depend on
you for your advice...
On what?
Look.
This discovery you've made...
...has not pleased everyone, I'm sure
To believe that Chandipur
is not a healthy place...
...is not what everyone agrees on
Many people have told
having seen the news...
...doctor Gupta is mistaken.
The water here can't be polluted
Is that so?
Don't worry about it!
I'm Chairman of three Housing Co-ops...
...and over all the
members of these co-operatives...
...I have sufficient influence...
I can guarantee that
everyone will back you
I think after this your
position will become strong!
That's good, alone one can't do much...
...though a lot depends on
what decision my brother takes
I've told you that all
of us are behind you!
If necessary, we'll call a
meeting and pass a resolution...
But, I don't like crossing my limits...
Going beyond is not practical!
But you've done the
citizens a great favour!
They should let you know
how grateful they are!
I don't think anyone will object to that
This isn't the time for a reception
Let the danger be over,
then we can think about it
Anyway, I've expressed my desires
Many thanks!
May we leave?
Please go ahead, I'll be with you!
Okay.
Can you spare 5 minutes?
Yes, that much only,
My brother is coming
All right, I'll be brief!
Tell me.
In such a situation
that has been created...
...what would you do in
a progressive newspaper?
I think...
...to warn the
citizens is the first duty...
...and immediately force a
decision of the higher authorities!
Who will decide?
You'll say your brother as a
Municipal Chairman will...
...but apart from your brother...
...there are other
influential persons I know
When the news of fish dying
in the river was published...
...then they came to my
office and threatened me...
...that they'll see me if
Chandipur gets a bad reputation
Actually,
...the prosperity of Chandipur...
...is being used for their own purposes
The Tripureshwar temple...
...is the greatest
attraction to Chandipur
The daily income is mind boggling!
That some of it isn't
going into their pockets...
...is hard to believe!
I want to expose them
As a newspaper editor...
...you'll do what you have to!
I know all these bureaucrats!
But I have to think of my own problems
I can't forget my duties as a doctor
But if your brother doesn't side you?
Brother, look at this..
We must be ready for every eventuality
I..
The report I had sent...
...are you ready to publish...
...if I wrote it as an article?
Of course! This a good suggestion
Then even if Nishit doesn't side me...
...I'll write it today itself
Ranu will copy it, when she returns,
Her handwriting is good...
...and tonight I'll
drop it at your office
Very good.
May I go?
Yes.
I don't think there's
anything to worry about
Greetings.
What are you doing in
the kitchen all the time?
Not in the kitchen.
I was showing the cook a new recipe
Let it be. Sit here awhile!
Sit, sit.
What are you thinking of?
After getting the report yesterday...
I'm very disturbed
I quite see that. Am I less worried?
I know what pressure is on you!
There's no end to your
labour and then this...
That's why a good
decision should be taken at once
And if Nishit disagrees
No, I can't believe it
He's as fond of Chandipur
Will he oppose me in these bad days?
I'm thinking of his jealousy!
I've seen him these thirty years!
Don't forget,
...he was the one who
got me this hospital job!
He told us about this house
But only after securing himself!
Not before!
If he took your side,
I would be very happy ... but ...
But?
He's not like you...
...to think you're brothers...
Hello.
Hey, good morning, Mr. Bhargava.
Good morning.
You've met Mr. Bhargava
- Of course, will you've some tea?
No, thanks.
Nor will I
Please come and sit.
Can we go to your Chamber?
Of course, come.
Come with me.
Well, Mr. Bhargava?
What have you done?
Why?
I've seen that report with Nishit
My mind's a whirl! My head is spinning
When I got the lab report,
I felt the same!
It's a serious matter
But why drag my temple into it?
It's right in the heart of Bhuvanpulli
The water there has been
found to be contaminated
The temple water is the same.
People are drinking that infected water!
What's this? Do you know?
This is holy water.
Holy water.
From my own temple.
I give this to you
Test it!
If you can find one
germ of bacteria in it...
I'll be deemed.
What are you saying
Your medical science won't
understand its properties
Dr. Gupta.
This holy water and all forms of
holy water are free from germs.
This..
This is rather strange!
No, sir.
It isn't strange at all.
It's not only tap water,
but Ganges water too!
How else can it be worshipped?
We get a regular supply of
Ganges water from Calcutta.
Then there is milk in it.
There is the holy leaf.
There is sesame.
And most important..
..there are basil leaves.
Do you know?
All impurities are
removed by the Tulsi leaf!
How can you know?
But Hindus has known it
for thousands of years.
After eating the `Prasad' a
patient fell ill and came to me
But not holy water.
Your brother told you to,
but you didn't ever go to my temple
In these last ten years.
You won't understand the Hindu religion
Then you won't do
anything about the water?
There's nothing to be
done about the temple
There is no necessity.
Then I have nothing to say
The number of patients are increasing
Forget about the temple
The municipality will censure that...
the people of
Bhuvanpulli boil their water
If necessary, more
tube wells will be dug
But you will not give
my temple a bad name
This is my request.
Are you going?
- Yes, I have another appointment
I have to go.
I'll see you off!
Listen Nishit
I can see that your decision
won't differ from Bhargava's
I have a question
Well?
Couldn't you have
discussed this business with me?
But everything needs proof!
I couldn't work on presumption
When I got proof, I told you
Do you want to present this
report to the temple authorities?
Immediately.
Officially to the municipality as well
The number of patients is increasing
Bhargava may not want his
temple to have a bad name...
...but I can't deny the lab report!
If we agree...
...that the underground pipe water...
...is contaminated by drain water
Have you any idea how much time...
...and money will be
needed to locate and repair it?
And the temple must be closed
Thousands of people
will know why its closed!
Is there any other choice?
If I say what Bhargava says...
...that because of Tulsi
leaf etc. in holy water...
... there can be no contamination...
...and its been
happening this way for ages
I'm concerned about the well
water of Tripureshwar temple...
It is polluted
Diseases are spreading here
which were never seen before
Many have died...
...among those who are ill,
are residence of Bevampulli...
...or visitor to the temple
I accept everything
But I still insist...
...you don't submit this
report to the Committee
I can keep quiet myself...
Bhargava won't tell anyone...
I know that for sure.
But everyone cannot suppress this matter
And if this is now known,
people will stop coming to Chandipur!
That's what they'll do if
there's an epidemic also!
I'll look into that
Whether to boil water...
or dig more tube wells...
I'll look into that.
But to say the temple
water causes illness...
...don't spread this rumour!
But some people are thinking about it!
How ?
Haven't you seen Janavarta?
No.
Chandipur endangered?
When you did this...
...didn't you think of yourself,
your family?
What are you trying to say?
Who got you the hospital job?
You did!
And I'm very grateful to you for that!
I thought by settling you...
... your ego would be satisfied...
You'll be more careful
Aren't I careful?
As soon as you get a
new idea, you publish it!
The last time. No park for children...
You complained and published it
When the land had already been
acquired by the Bhargava trust
I didn't know that!
If you'd asked me, you'd have known!
Again you should have told me...
...as soon as you
sent the chemical report
But instead you wrote to the press
But... what if people know?
You've made a great mistake...
... by involving the temple in it!
The temple isn't mentioned in the paper,
...nor in Bhuvanpulli's name!
The people aren't fools!
Even a stall owner knows...
...that Bhuvanpulli is
the most crowded area
Now it's your duty...
...to contradict what you say...
Or else
...write to the
press that you were wrong
That its not as serious matter...
...as you had thought before!
But I cannot lie
Then ...
... as municipal Chairman...
...I must tell them!
I will definitely protest about it!
The greatest attraction
to Chandipur is its temple
And the temple was my idea.
I won't hear any scandal about it!
Think over what I said
You should be seriously affected
I don't want that either
You're forgetting one thing...
What?
There's something called a court!
If you tie me down,
...I'm bound to take
shelter under the law!
Do you know Doctor Nandi?
No, but his bother is my patient
Then you ought to know...
... that the doctor who goes
twice a week to the temple...
...he will tear up the
petition of one so irreligious as you!
I met him last week
He's in good health!
He has not got..
..infective hepatitis.
What's the matter?
What have both of you brothers started?
I heard every word you both said
Amazing
My own brother...
...said all this in my house!
I'm not surprised in the least
How little I know of him
But such a violent reaction...
I didn't even dream of it...
As if the temple is his own!
What if your brother
dresses like an Englishman
Sanctity will be finished for
ever because of his negligence
Says that water is
purified by Tulsi leaves
There's no contamination in Holy water!
Ever heard of such things!
Have you?
I have...
...in my childhood... from my father
Amazing !
Only now science has become important...
It wasn't there then
Don't you care to go to the temple?
Maya, look at me
Tell me truly
Don't you care to go to the temple?
Why this question?
- Tell me!
Now I...
I don't want anything between us!
Earlier?
You don't believe in religion.
I'm not upset
Earlier, perhaps
Now I understand ...
... that a man, not knowing everything,
can still be honest
What's the use of being honest
Use ?
I understand, if you don't
Be cool and think ...
What to do !
If Nishit sided with me
it would've been good ...
... but
... without him, much needs to be done
How can you say this ?
I'm not alone
Backing me is a progressive newspaper
They are publishing an
important article about this situation
The printer of this paper
Adhirbabu is Chairman of
... there
co-opertative Housing societies
He has assured me that all his
members will support me, always
Now how can I say that I'm alone?
There are still obstructions to overcome
"It has not gone again
and it is still here."
"The darkness. Not yet."
"It has not gone again
and it is still here."
"The darkness. Not gone yet."
"Life is not yet over."
Mother,
...Father has written so well
and you're singing a sad song ?
Yes. Thanks.
Tell me truly how it needs ?
- Very good
But will Janavarta
publish this, father ?
Why not?
They've done so before.
Is this the same sort of Article?
You've never written
such a bold Article before
You're talking about not
drinking holy water...
...closing down the temple
That's to prevent the spread of disease
Nothing to do with religion
Janavarta won't be able to
distinguish between the two
But Haridas told me he would himself
I doubt even more
- Why ?
I don't care for him a bit
He just stares at woman !
That's your impression ?
I don't doubt, Haridas is a good person
I hope...
...that it's an error of judgement
Should I sing a happy song ?
Both of you are arguing
Ranu's wrong, the
article will be published
I hope so
No one speaks the truth any more
If its published, won't
your brother take revenge ?
Isn't sit helpless in fear of Nishit
I must do my duty
I admit that ...
... but I'm very scared
I know Nishit well
You were never close to each other
I haven't forgotten anything
Remember what happened
after father-in-law's death ?
Yes, indeed
I've never said anything to Ranu
She'd just been born then
What happened then ?
Your grandfather ...
... was very fond of good things ...
... being a lawyer he
saved quite a bit ...
...but spent it all
At the age of 60, he
left behind a huge debt
Nishit was working then
But didn't spend a
farthing in repayment of that debt
Your father sweated and toiled ...
... to pay back, all by himself
How I managed this family only I know !
Am I worried for nothing ?
They must publish this article
I'll give it to them just now
So late ?
I've informed Haridas,
he'll wait at the office
I'm very scared, mother
- Am I any less afraid ?
The honest suffer the most !
Please stand in a queue.
Hey, priest. Please
perform the veneration.
Mother, give me another sweet.
Please give me some holy water.
Read it ?
I shiver to think what such an
article in our paper will do
Listen ...
For the last 26 years...
...I have been a medical
practitioner in Chandipur
I'm saying that nothing so
dangerous has been faced here before
If no action is taken at once,
there'll be an epidemic
This action not only
depends on this organization ...
... people also have to participate
Is very sad ...
... that the water of
Tirupeshwar temple has been proved ...
... to be contaminated ...
... for religious and household
work if this water is used ...
... there'll be no way to
protect from these complicated diseases
This water should be
immediately purified
This is the only way to
safeguard Chandipur from this disaster
There's no
comparison to this article ...
It will bring about awarness
That's what I doubt? How?
Seventeen letters have been posted to us
Letters ?
From readers
What do they say ?
Ashok Gupta is wrong ...
Chandipur's water cannot be impure
They're fools !
Disputing scientific evidence !
Why are you listening to them ?
When the article is published our
prestige will increase tenfold !
We've never published
anything like this ...
... nor has Dr.Gupta
ever written such things !
I don't know the man ...
... but reading the article
I've developed a respect for him
I can hardly
He's one in a million ...
Shouldn't we support him ?
Adhirbabu always says to
keep one's distance ...
... but we can't
think like that any more
This is like the hammer on the head.
This is today's situation
Busy ?
Come in Sir ! We were
just talking about you !
Really ?
Our Assistant editor, Biresh Guha
He's just read your article - I see.
I'm honored ...
I've never read such
a good article ever!
Thank you, I am happy to hear that
If this is the view of the
Assistant editor, what does the Editor say?
You know I'm one of your followers ...
Well then ? Publish it!
Let me tell you something ...
The morning post has brought
these seventeen letters ...
Letters ?
They can't believe that
Chandipur's water can be contaminated
I see !
They think Chandipur is Heaven!
They refuse to bear
anything bad about it
But there are other
people as well Haridas...
Even among your readers itself
Even if they believe that
Chandipur is an ideal town...
...a disaster is not impossible here!
They don't refute scientific
evidence unlike illiterates
They are aware of the
disaster an epidemic can cause!
That this will be a great
disaster for the city...
...and that it must be
prevented they firmly believe
These are my readers, Haridas!
I don't believe that if
you publish my article...
...they'll refuse it
You print it
Greetings, doctor.
Hearing your voice I thought I'd stop by
Have you read my article?
Not yet, I will in a while
I hope this won't spoil everything
If you've thought of me while writing
I wouldn't worry at all
Of you?
The question of limit
I'll be in trouble, if
it exceeds that limit
Listen to me
The danger for Chandipur is a
thousand times more than that for you
Can't think of oneself anymore!
There's shadow of a
calamity over the city today
And the only way to protect it,
is by publishing my article
If you say so...
I loudly say so Ajit
I need your support for this article
All right
I'll just come back to
collect your article
Then I'll go. I have a patient.
Give the article for composing
I'll check the proof in the evening
Come on.
Now..
What is it?
We have to take a
great risk doing this...
...hope you appreciate it
If you don't take any risk,
why call yourself progressive?
You say your readers
decide what should be said...
It's also your duty to enlighten them up
To influence their thinking!
Remember that!
Ajit babu will shiver at the article
Yes, he's very cowardly
And he's become whimsical
about keeping safe distance!
Can't we exist without him?
How can we?
When in trouble, who will
finance our printing costs?
That's true!
But don't support him at all
with regard to this article
...it is only...
Come in
Come in.
Your father was just here? -is it?
Thought I'd return your
book during the break!
The translation?
Have you read the book
No, but I've heard it, its very popular
That's why I thought
we'd publish it on Sunday
I read it last night
It's a terrible story
It has no link to your values
Why? What does it say?
Nothing in it rings true
It says there's
supernatural force on earth...
...Which protects the good
and punishes the wrongdoers
Can you imagine anything so foolish?
You're laughing?
Indrani.
Unfortunately..
..our readers want this.
We have to earn some money
to increase our circulation
Would we publish this
if we had a strong base?
You keep saying, your
circulation is poor...
...but seeing your office
its difficult to believe
Anyway...
I won't translate it!
Because I don't believe a word of it
I can't imagine how you're
thinking of publishing this!
Especially when you're
publishing an article like this
Are you speaking of
your father's article?
Aren't you printing that?
- We're thinking about it
Here you will be doing a
service to everyone...
...If it's printed...
Do you know why?
...I do... -What?
My father speaks the truth, boldly...
and writes well, that's why
...That's true...
there's one more reason
What?
He is...
...your father!
What are you saying?
It's the truth
I've been so often to your
father's place to collect writing
...one reason was to see you,
which you don't understand
I don't understand nor do I want to know
Don't be angry Indrani
It's not that I
don't respect your father
Respect?
You're cheating my father!
What sort of a man are you?
You're talking a bit angrily
Is this the right time
Why not now?
If Janavarta does
not help your father...
he won't have any support
I see! ... I'm leaving!
I couldn't tell you as you had a visitor
The Municipal Chairman is here!
Sorry, sir. I made you wait!
I was seeing your office
- Come
Was that my niece?
- I had given her a book to translate
Sit down.
How can I help?
Today there's been an unwanted incident
Like?
It's my brother
He has sent a report to the
authorities and the municipal
Despite of my warning
The report is dangerous
I know about it
How?
He has sent a report based on that
Have you read it?
Yes.
I have -Will it be published?
I can't decide yet!
Actually.. - No!
Do you realise the danger
of publishing this report?
He says stop giving holy
water close the temple
Dig out the underground
pipe and fix a new pipe line
Can't you see? This is
the ranting of a mad man ?
Will your readers agree to this?
The doctor's article... -Just a minute
Has he come to take the
article to compose it?
He's our printer and publisher
Printer and publisher?
Greetings, Mr. Chairman.
Have you read Ashok's article?
You mean Dr. Gupta's article?
Yes, he's my elder brother
No. I haven't, I'll now
Do you know, you'll be in
trouble if you publish this
I'm not aware of this
Do you go to the temple?
I do
- sometimes!
Do you take holy water?
Is that wrong?
From now...
You can't -Why not?
By the ordering Ashok Gupta
And by his order the temple
will be closed indefinitely
What?
Is all this in his article? -It is
Are you telling me to publish this?
Listen, Haridas
I've brought a circular...
from the municipality
I'll read it to you
On behalf of Chandipur municipality,
we inform you...
...that with regards to water,
in part of this town...
Some person are
spreading false rumours...
We notify the public not to be
alarmed by malignant rumours
We've engaged specialist to test
the water in many parts of the town
And understand that this
water is harmless for drinking
We condemn the vicious attempt
to spread such false rumours....
Chairman Chandipur municipality!
Dr. Gupta's here He's
getting out of his car
Please escort the chairman
to your room, sir please...
Why?
Why should I go? I'll stay here
Am I seeing my youngest brother?
Are you here to see my
article is not published?
That's the main idea!
You won't succeed
You may not be aware that I
came by here some time ago
I came again to make a correction!
Give me the article please.
-I haven't got it yet
Janavarta is publishing my article
People not aware that the
epidemic is spreading in the city...
...they will know tomorrow
I believe people will take my advice...
...and that ... will
be good for Chandipur
Is Haridas given you his word?
Of course!
Well?
What do you say, Haridas?
No. I mean...
Speak up, clearly!
I thought I'd support Dr.Gupta...
...before reading the article!
Now it's not possible
Then say so!
What?
What's this Haridas?
You came in suddenly and I
couldn't tell you! Openly!
We can't publish your article. Dr. Gupta
We are running Janavarta...
...the way you've
brought up the temple...
You mean what I said
about the temple is all lies?
It's not what I mean....
It's public opinion
We can't ignore that in a newspaper
Whether this is public opinion...
...or not how to know in advance?
Are you God?
Do you know the pulse of the people
We are running the
paper for 12 years now,
....we've some experience
Print this and see what happens!
I'll take the entire responsibility
If we do so,
...then our circulation
will down to one quarter
Then we'll have to close down
But you said a while ago...
...you spoke so much
yesterday at my house...
Hello.
Call after half an hour
Omit the part about the temple...
and I'll publish it!
I'm a doctor, haven't
I a duty to society?
The water contains bacteria...
...can't I say it in a daily paper?
I am very sorry, Dr. Gupta.
Are you human?
And you?
If you write like this,
how can I give you moral support?
My members themselves will...
...how can I ask them to print it?
I've left the matter,
...see that is printed
on tomorrow's front page
Okay.
What do you think? You
can't stop my mouth so easily?
I'll read it out at the meeting
People will hear about it,
even if they don't read about it!
Meeting?
Where will it be?
Why?
Ramanar Hall... Vivekananda Hall!
You won't get either
Is that what you'll arrange?
All right
I don't need a hall
I'll call a meeting in the open air!
I'll be present there!
You want to ruin my speech...
...but what if the
epidemic spreads in Chandipur?
In that case...
...it will not be because of holy water
Very well.
I'm inviting all of you to my lecture
I'll see what you do!
You want to say something?
What have you done?
Meaning?
You won't publish this article?
You've gone back your word!
Look Biresh
I am the editor of this paper
I'll decide what to
publish and what not to!
By publishing the article...
I believe, Janavarta would
have gained a good name...
...and supported a true human!
How are you denying the crisis?
The epidemic is there!
I don't want to
discuss this with you anymore
Go back to your room!
What's this? You're here at this hour?
Your father phoned me
Where's he? Hasn't he returned?
He has, he's with a patient
Why did he phone? -It's a long story
Janavarta will not
publish your father's article.
They have refused.
I knew it!
I went there to return
their book this afternoon
Haridas is an awful man...
...and so is their paper!
Now your father wants to
spread his article by lecturing!
But no hall is available
Why?
Your uncle, has made such arrangements!
What injustice!
Think of it....
The brothers are like opponents!
He range me to arrange the
meeting in our Drama hall!
I talked to your uncle.
He agrees on one condition
Do you know what your
uncle says of your father?
When is the lecture?
Sunday evening at six!
The posters are being printed,
they'll be parted all over!
You won't get into any trouble will you?
I don't care,
...don't you know me by now?
Then I do!
Is that you Ranu?
- Yes father
I heard it all from Ronen
You were right
I didn't know...
...Haridas at all!
He pretends of a
progressive ...but he's no courage!
No back bone!
It's good in a way
If it was published,
...your father would have lost his job
Anyway you've arranged the
lecture...like a true friend!
My only aim is to let
people know the situation...
Tomorrow there'll be
a notice in the paper
What notice?
That people shouldn't be worried...
..that there's nothing
wrong with the water
I should have guessed it long ago....
That by taking holy
water you'd fall ill...
...no Hindu would agree
But it is true that...
...keeping the matter hanging
will banning about one thing...
...an epidemic!
Lecture. Time : 15 January, 1989, Sunday
Subject: Health Hazard in Chandipur
Speaker: Dr. Ashok Gupta
Venue: Halder Drama Hall
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8..
..9, 10. Hello. Hello.
Hello. Hello.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8..
..9, 10. Hello. Hello.
So you have come?
-Yes! - Come and sit down.
I attend all public meetings!
What's the subject? I
entered seeing the crowd!
Don't ask me!
He'll talk something about health !
The health of Chandipur?
I think its about that
water problem we had here
That came in the papers,
didn't you read it?
No. -That was refused by the Chairman
I'm here to listen to what he says
Did you see? My
opponents are present also!
Where?
Look ahead
How are they here?
I called them
The things you get upto....
Mother.
Here's uncle
Did you call him as well?
He himself said he'd come!
It's a public meeting...
...I can't stop people from coming
I'll propose you as president
President?
With you here? -I have a problem.
Haridas. You'll second my proposal
All right !
I wish to say something
before Ashok, please announce it
If there's time, I'll
request you to speak also
Me? -Yes
You've read the article
and can give your opinion
They're discussing some plans!
It doesn't look good!
Just a minute
Listen, I don't like the looks of things
The opponents are all here.
I am depending on you
Don't worry! We are ready.
Good.
Dr. Gupta, isn't it time?
Yes, it is. -Start then!
Just a minute
I think we should elect a Chairman first
Why?
I'm only going to read a paper
Who knows how people will react?
You can't have a
meeting without the Chairman
I propose the name of Adhir Mukherjee
I second it
Mr. Adhir.
Come !
Friends, as Chairman of this meeting....
I will say only one thing
Who are you?
I am the printer and
publisher of Janavarta. - I see.
Carry on
I will only say one thing
I am a peace loving person
I request the meeting
to be a peaceful one
Before Dr. Gupta speaks ... our
Chairman of the Municipality...
Dr. Nishit Gupta would
like to say a few words
May I request him to do so
Friends...
Today's speaker is
knows to me intimately
I also know what he wants to say
I would like to ask,
if any one of you...
...is willing to hear
words said against our temple
No. Certainly not!
We don't want to listen to
anything bad about the temple.
But that is exactly what Dr.
Gupta wants to do!
I propose that Dr. Gupta
should not be allowed to speak !
We don't want to hear him!
What?
We want to hear Dr. Gupta
Speak Dr.Gupta. -Why isn't
he being allowed to speak?
Give the mike to Dr. Gupta, we
don't want to listen to you!
Order. Order. Order!
You've seen the notice of
Municipality in the papers
Many of you may have read it
What I've said there is the truth
Dr. Gupta says the
temple water is contaminated
And the same water is
being drunk as holy water!
I say that the holy
water can never be impure
Dr. Gupta suggested that the
sample should've closed now...
...and its water purified
Do you accept such a proposal?
No, no!
You can't shut the temple down!
The editor of Janavarta is present here
Gupta submitted the
article to the paper!
The editor justifiably
refused to permit it
I request him to say a
few words on the subject
We don't want to hear him?
We've come to hear Dr. Gupta....
...not the editor of Janavarta
Friends,
at first I believed
what Dr. Gupta said...
...but later I was
forced to change my opinion
I realised that if I am
to print his article ...
...my readers will strongly object
I had a cordial
relationship with Dr. Gupta
I'd been to his house, had
tea and discussed many matters
In fact, our paper has
carried many of his articles
But, in this latest piece,
he has remarked about our temple...
...which no one can approve of
As the editor of a paper...
...I cannot ignore public opinion!
It was due to this....
...that I turned
down Dr. Gupta's article
I personally feel...
...that what Dr.
Gupta says is not correct
What is he saying? -
What is happening here?
I propose that we take
a vote on the proposal
I wish to ask a question first
Go ahead!
Is this a meeting...
...or a farce?
I called the meeting!
It was my notices
which brought the people...
...to hear me speak
Let them hear me
first and then decide...
...if I'm right or wrong
Let the municipal
chairman say what he wishes!
Why must you take his
word as gospel truth?
You've taken the trouble to come here.
Listen to me first...
Let me be allowed to speak
We don't want to hear
talk against the temple.
Dr. Gupta keep quiet.
Yes, yes. Dr. Gupta.
Please be quiet. - Yes, yes.
I refused to be silenced so easily
I love this town,
...the place of my birth most dearly!
Whatever I've done as a
doctor is for the town's welfare !
I've been practicing
here for 26 years now!
It is possible...
...that some of my
patients are amongst you!
I wish to say that Dr.
Gupta is an eminent doctor...
...he saved my life
when I was facing death
I'm eternally grateful!
Thank you Abani babu
I wish to say that until quite recently,
...our climate was healthy
But no longer!
I have proof of that!
And I want to tell you...
Chandipur has never been
threatened with such disaster
It is not that a healthy
climate cannot be restored...
...to avert disaster.
You must be told or how would you know?
Tell me do you want to hear?
Yes, we want to hear!
Yes, speak up, we want to hear you!
Friends,
what I'm trying to tell you tonight...
Mr. Chairman...
I wish to put a question to Dr.Gupta
Please do...
Do you call yourself a Hindu?
-What kind of question is that?
There's a reason, answer
Yes I'm one, I emphatically say so!
There can be no doubt about that
Have you been to our
temple in the last 10 years?
Not in the manner that you mean!
In other words, you don't pray!
No -Why not?
Don't you believe in such rituals?
I'll tell you the truth
Certain customs of Hinduism,
I don't follow...
Science has snapped my beliefs
But that is personal
I can't dream of
opposing the faith of someone...
...who worships at the
temple and drinks the holy water!
It has been proved that
the temple water has bacteria
So I say that to drink
holy water at this stage..
...or to drink any
water there is dangerous
This is a question of hygiene,
not of religion
I insist that the water
supply must be purified at once
Then there can be no danger
in restoring temple rituals
Do you know how many
people drink holy water?
Do you?
I find from the crowd
I see at the temple...
...about a thousand!
How many cases of water
borne diseases have come to you?
You can't look at it like that!
I'm not the only doctor here!
Answer my question!
In the last fortnight, I've
treated about 150 patients
Many of them have died
I'm only talking of myself
You must add what other doctors say
Shall we say about 500 in all?
Yes, certainly
In the last fortnight, 15000
have consumed the holy water...
and 500 have fallen ill!
Do you still believe that drinking
holy water causes these ailments
We don't believe Dr. Gupta!
Don't speak rubbish, Dr.
Gupta. - We will not accept it.
Run. Come on. Come on, run. - Run. Run.
Dr. Gupta, let's get
away There's a back door!
Come on. Come on.
Down with Dr. Gupta. -
Down with Dr. Gupta.
Dr. Ashok Gupta is a Public Enemy
You can't get out at all!
How can we stay like this
Run away?
What else?
No!
What about the poisonous water?
And my patients?
In this darkest hour....
Shall I run away?
The people won't let you stay here
I can see that, Maya!
I haven't done any wrong
Why must this happen?
Won't the people realize
what a mistake they are making?
May I come in?
Come in
Sit down.
I'm sorry this is
happening to your house
What can you do?
This is the work of hired hoodlums!
I know.
Tell me...
It's not my task doctor, but...
I will make it easy for you
You want me to leave, right?
I'd never say so myself
You know me.
You've been my tenant
for the last 5 years...
...to be honest
I hesitate to say `tenant'
Our relationship
doesn't call for such a term!
There has never been
any friction between us
You cured my daughter of her illness...
...I'm grateful to you for it, but...
Go on
The neighbours have pressurised me...
They don't want you here
I speak for that
I'm helpless, doctor
I wouldn't say anything to defend you
Is that it?
Yes
All right
Let me see which way to turn...
...then I'll decide what to do
Don't hold it against me
I was left with no choice but to come
My feelings towards you
have not changed at all...
...whatever people say!
I sympathies with you
May I leave?
Yes. - Okay, greetings.
How come you're back so early?
I'll tell you
She has been asked to quit
Because she is a
daughter of Ashok Gupta.
Isn't it?
Yes.
Lost your job?
5 parents have written
that I shouldn't teach anymore
Kamaladi told me
Who liked you so much?
She felt very unhappy
What else could she do?
The committees make the decisions
My job wasn't confirmed yet
Hello.
This is Nishit -Good morning !
I presume I'm no longer in the hospital?
The committee has suspended you...
...and is serving a show cause notice
If you can't answer
satisfactorily you'll be dismissed
Thanks!
There's one thing -What?
If you admit your fault,
you won't lose your job!
You know very well, that
is the last thing I will do
Then let things stand
Very well
What's this?
We have a proposition...
...which could turn you
in the public's favour!
Get out!
At once!
Or I'll have you thrown out
What is it?
I have lost!
No more fight left in me!
Did Nishit call?
Your job?
Chandan?
Yes.
Say I can't meet him now!
Ronen was to come!
He has something to tell you
I see.
If it's Ronen, let him in
Because of this wretch...
...you lost everything !
I don't know how to console you
Why do you take it so much to heart?
You have your private practice
There's no better doctor
than you in this town!
If need be, I can always private lesson
Surely that will see us through
What's this?
Are you ill?
The way my world is crumbling...
...how can I not be ill?
Biresh had phoned me
He had something to say to you
He hesitated to come alone
Your editor was here a while ago
I sent him away
Not my editor, doctor...
...I'm no longer with Janavarta
What?
Yes.
I'm on my own. Independent!
Really?
Sir let's hear about it
The way Janavarta behaved with you...
I couldn't tolerate it!
And last night's meeting was a farce!
I want to send a report of the
meeting to all Calcutta papers
Along with a candidate to be interviewed
But that's....admirable!
It's just what I want!
To let people know my view and judge!
Please get some tea
I am most willing to
give an interview....
Call it the
Confessions of a Public Enemy!
See what is scrawled outside?
Before the interview starts,
may I speak to you?
If you could just go
through these proofs
What proofs?
The article you wrote
which Janavarta turned down
Ranu had a copy
- gave it to me
We're publishing it as a pamphlet!
Distribute it door to door!
I see.
So ... there is hope? -Certainly!
There'll be pure water in
the temple again, you'll see
We'll campaign for you, till
people come to their senses
I thought ... the ground
had slipped under my feet!
The thought of leaving this house
Ranu has no job, I....
Long live Dr.Gupta
Who are they?
They're coming to you
Long live, Dr. Gupta!
Who are they?
My theatre group, and
other educated boys and girls
They met last night, and are
coming to tell you today...
...that they are behind you!
Hail Dr. Gupta. - Hail.
This is unbelievable!
Long live, Ashok Gupta!
Long live Dr. Gupta
Long live Dr.Gupta
- Who are they?
I'm not alone!
- Long live Dr. Gupta
I may be a public enemy,
but I have a lot of friends.
We'll stay here, our work is here!
Long live Dr. Gupta